One benefit to reading God's word is that it allows us to see a full range of Jehovah's feelings and
reactions when it comes to the conduct and actions of his servants and others.
For example, the Bible describes Jehovah as being grieved and
saddened toward the wickedness in Noah's day.
He felt compassion for a lot.
And when speaking about his son,
the study note to Matthew chapter 3 verse 17 says,
Jesus was one with whom God was well pleased in whom he took great delight.
If we look at the other end of the spectrum with the nation of Israel, for example, at times the Bible says,
Jehovah's anger flared or he was very angry with them.
But when it comes to Solomon,
how does the Bible describe Jehovah's reaction to Solomon breaking the law mentioned in today's text?
Turn with me, pleasing your Bibles to first Kings chapter 11 and we get the answer in first Kings chapter 11
verses 9 and 10.
There it says
Jehovah became
furious at Solomon because his heart had inclined away from Jehovah the God of Israel.
Who had appeared to him twice and had warned him about this very thing that he should not go after other gods.
But he did not obey what Jehovah had commanded.
Can you imagine Jehovah being furious at us for something we had said or done?
Of course, we recognize when the Bible speaks about Jehovah being angry or furious,
these feelings are always expressed in a controlled manner.
The inside book states that God's anger is always justified,
does not stem from a momentary whim to be later regretted,
and is always under control and in harmony with the attributes of love, wisdom, and justice.
So with that in mind, why did Jehovah react the way he did towards Solomon?
Let's go back to verse 9.
Verse 9 says that Jehovah appeared to Solomon twice.
The first time is mentioned in first Kings chapter 3.
Their Solomon was at the start of his kingship and Jehovah appears to him in a dream and
invites him to make a request.
Verses 7 through 9, Solomon acknowledges his young, inexperienced, so he requests wisdom.
And we know what happened.
Jehovah blesses him for his thought process, he gives him a wise and understanding heart,
and then he generously adds prosperity and wealth.
But Jehovah also outlines for Solomon a path, a path to help him remain successful.
No verse 14 of chapter 3, he said,
And if you walk in my ways by keeping my regulations and my commandments
just as David your father walked, I will also give you a long life.
Very loving on Jehovah's part.
Interestingly, if you look at verse 1,
prior to Jehovah appearing to Solomon, Solomon had already taken a foreign wife
by Mary and Pharaoh's daughter.
And yet, there's no indication that Jehovah turned away from him,
that he abandoned him, quickly rejected him as king, or strongly disciplined him.
Now you think about that.
Once Jehovah granted Solomon with the wisdom he requested,
do you think Solomon ever reflected on his actions and realized he was a recipient of Jehovah's
mercy? Did that ever cause him to dig deeper into God's word, to try to find ways to apply
what he learned from that point forward? We know that there were periods of Solomon's life where
he did follow God's laws and regulations, and Jehovah blessed him, but he wasn't consistent.
He couldn't maintain it. Could he have rationalized that there were some things in the law that
just didn't apply to him? Well, is there a lesson for us?
Can we think of a time or times when Jehovah has appeared to us, figuratively speaking?
Maybe like Solomon, we were inexperienced in some way. Perhaps we showed poor judgment on a matter,
or something caused us to develop a negative attitude.
And then we heard a nice point at a congregation meeting. We came across something in our personal
study. Were perhaps in the spirit of Galatians 6.1, someone showed loving concern, brought the
matter to our attention, and then from the scriptures outlined a path for us that would help us to be
successful. Is that your Holbo can bring matters to our attention in any number of ways?
But what is our response? How will his feelings be affected? With all of the direction and
admonition we get, it could be easy at times to rationalize that there are some things that
just don't apply to us, or even justify in our minds that something is not as bad as Jehovah says it
is. Well, certainly Solomon's example shows us that that kind of thinking can be deceptive,
and could lead us into a gradual departure from God's requirements. Why can we say that?
Let's look at the second time Jehovah appeared to Solomon. That's in 1 Kings 9.
At this point Solomon has completed the building of the temple and other building projects.
So this is likely 20 years later from when Jehovah first appeared to Solomon. So Solomon is not a
young king anymore. At this point, he's experienced, he's seasoned, he's accomplished, and when
Jehovah appears to him, he indicates that he has not forgotten Solomon. He's still with him. He
has not forgotten Solomon's temple inauguration prayer years earlier, and then in verses 4 through 9,
he again reminds Solomon of the need to stay faithful, just as his father David had done.
But he also gives the warning. If Solomon and the people chose not to obey,
Jehovah warned that they would be cut off, and he would bring calamity upon them.
How would Solomon respond this time? Sometimes when we're older, the longer we live,
the more likely we are to reflect on our lives. Do you think Solomon did that at this point?
Do you think Solomon ever wondered why does Jehovah keep bringing this matter to my attention?
Did he ever reflect on why Jehovah loved his father David so much, and then looked for ways to
imitate his example? What was evident was that Solomon became complacent in his worship,
and he took one fall step after another. Mary and one pagan wife was bad enough,
but when all was said and done, 700 wives, many of who were pagan,
300 concubines, following other gods, establishing high places for false worship.
You see Solomon took disobedience and disregard for Jehovah's laws to another level.
So taking all of this into account, can we understand why Jehovah felt the way he did,
and why his fury towards Solomon was justified?
How can this Bible account help us? It should help us to be determined not to become complacent
in our worship. Solomon's actions were not casual mistakes. This was a progressive,
sinking into disobedience. So may we you and I be sensitive to Jehovah's direction,
be sensitive to his reminders, look for ways that we can make practical application
of what he says in our life. We can also use this account to hide and strengthen our appreciation
for Jehovah's love and mercy. Whether we're relatively new in the truth or we've been serving Jehovah
for decades, our imperfection may cause us to make mistakes from time to time, to do things that
may disappoint Jehovah, possibly even anger him. But here's a comforting thought.
Anger is not a dominant quality of Jehovah. He's a happy God, slow to anger, abundant in loving
kindness. And when he sees that we're putting forth the effort to fear him, we just think of how
that makes him feel and how that magnifies his name. He really is a sobering thought that
as insignificant imperfect humans, you and I can do things to move or affect the feelings
of the highest personage in the universe for good or for bad. Well, may those things we do always
be for good so that Jehovah can feel about us the way that he did his son, that we are ones with whom
God is well pleased and brings joy to his heart.